docs/guide/src/docs/asciidoc/usage.adoc, before:


[[_usage]]
= Usage

== Scheduling

The basic usage of this library is to provide easy way to run scheduled tasks in a distributed environment.

=== Cron Jobs

To create a scheduled CRON job use `@Cron` annotation containing the CRON definition string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Cron Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/CronSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Fixed Delay Jobs

To create a fixed delay job use `@FixedDelay` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Fixed Delay Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedDelaySpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Fixed Rate Jobs

To create a fixed delay job use `@FixedRate` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Fixed Rate Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Initial Delay Jobs

To create a job with an initial delay use `@InitialDelay` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.
This annotation can be combined with `@FixedRate` and `@FixedDelay` annotations.

[source,java]
.Initial Delay Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/InitialDelaySpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

== Concurrency Management

You can limit the number of parallel executions using the `@Concurrency` annotation. `@Consecutive` annotation
is an alias to `@Concurrency(1)` and disables parallel execution completely.

[source,java]
.Fixed Rate Job Running at Most Five Parallel Tasks
----
@Concurrency(5)
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

== Distributed Jobs

=== Leaders and Followers Jobs

Micronaut Worker library can help you to run jobs in a distributed environments. You can choose to
run the code only on the leader server or only on the followers.

[source,java]
.Leader Only Job
----
@LeaderOnly
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/CronSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

[source,java]
.Follower Only Job
----
@FollowerOnly
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Jobs using Queue

In the distributed environment, the tasks usually process messages using queues. In Micronaut Worker,
you have three type of queue related jobs - producers, consumers and pipes - depending on a number of
arguments they have and their return value.

The name of the queue can be customised using `@Consumes` and `@Produces`
annotations, otherwise the name is derived from the simple name of the class with any `Job`, `Consumer`, `Producer`
suffixes (in this order recursively). If the `micronaut.application.name` property is set then the
extracted name is prefixed with the application name followed by an underscore. For example,
`MyOwnConsumerJob` with `micronaut.application.name` set to `myapp` will produce the following
default queue name `myapp_MyOwn`.

==== Producer

Producer jobs returns a value, usually a `Publisher`, collection of objects or any other object.
Producer jobs are always run only on the leader server.

[source,java]
.Producer Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker-tck/src/main/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/tck/queue/SendWordsJob.groovy[tag=simple-producer-method,indent=0]
----

==== Consumer

Consumer jobs takes a single parameter. They are usually a `@FixedRate` jobs waiting for a message from a queue.
The messages can be sent into the queue from external systems, a producer job or using `JobManager#enqueue` method.

[source,java]
.Consumer Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker-tck/src/main/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/tck/queue/SendWordsJob.groovy[tag=simple-consumer-method,indent=0]
----


==== Pipe

Pipe jobs are combination of producer and consumer. They usually use `@Consumes` and `@Produces`
to specify the source, and the destination name of the queue.

[source,java]
.Pipe Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/PipeSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

As with consumer job, you can use `JobManager#enqueue` to send messages to the job.

[source,java]
.Send Message to Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/PipeSpec.groovy[tag=enqueue,indent=0]
----

== Configuration

=== General Settings

You can disable all jobs by setting `worker.enabled` property to `false`:

[source,yaml]
.Disabling All Jobs
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-disabled.yml[]
----

NOTE: All the jobs are also disabed for the `test` and `function` environment.

=== Job Configuration

Literally everything you can configure using the annotations, you can configure externally.
The name of the job for classes having just a single job method is the name of the class hyphenated, e.g. `sample-job`
for a class `SampleJob`. If the class contains more than one job methods then jobs are created
for each method and the name contains both the simple class name and the name of the method, e.g.
`sample-job-method-one` for `SampleJob#methodOne`. You can override the default name by using
`@Named("another-name")`. The custom name should already been hyphenated.

You can individually disable specific jobs:

[source,yaml]
.Disabling Single Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-disabled-individual.yml[]
----

You can even change the type of the job:

[source,yaml]
.Switch to Cron Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-cron.yml[]
----

WARNING: You can use only one of `cron`, `fixed-delay` and `fixed-rate` settings. If more than one
is used then the first of `cron`, `fixed-delay` or `fixed-rate` is selected in this particular order. You can use`initial-delay` either individually or with `fixed-delay` or `fixed-rate` settings.

You can change the concurrency level and leader/follower execution:

[source,yaml]
.Concurrency Selection
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-concurrency.yml[]
----

You can configure the consumer and producer queues for distributed jobs.

[source,yaml]
.Queues Customisation
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-queues.yml[]
----

== Events

There are currently three events being fired:

  * `JobExecutionStartedEvent` - this event is fired before executing the job
  * `JobExecutionFinishedEvent` - this event is fired after the execution is finished
  * `JobExecutionResultEvent` - this event is fired after the execution of producer or pipe job is finished

WARNING: The `JobExecutionResultEvent` contains the reference to the `result` of the execution and any modifications of the `result` may cause unexpected behavior.

The basic example (already present in the codebase) is simple logging:

[source,java]
.Logging Job Excution using Events
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/main/java/com/agorapulse/worker/event/JobEventsLogger.java[lines=18..-1,options="nowrap"]
----

TIP: If https://github.com/agorapulse/micronaut-snitch[Micronaut Snitch] is present on the classpath and configured with the name of the job then the `snitch` method is called automatically after successful execution.

== Console Integration

Micronaut Worker does not provide any management endpoint for security reasons, but it integrates with
https://agorapulse.github.io/micronaut-console[Micronaut Console] to monitor the jobs and event to trigger them manually.

There is an instance of `JobManager` aliased as `jobs` added into the script bindings. There is a variable added for
every job as well. The name is a lower-camel-case version on the job name such as `sampleJob` for the `sample-job` job.

[source]
.Additional Binding into Micoronaut Console
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/variables.txt[]
----

TIP: The job variables are instances of `JobAccessor` which also provides methods `run()` and `enqueue(message)` to let you easily trigger the jobs from the console.

A very simple script with just variable `jobs` will actually print the status of the current job execution. Depending
on which console's endpoint you choose, you get either text or a JSON summary.

[source,groovy]
.Job Manager Script
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobs.groovy[]
----

[source,options="nowrap"]
.Job Manager Script - Text Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobsResponse.txt[]
----


[source]
.Job Manager Script - JSON Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobsResponse.json[]
----

Returning a job variable from the script will render details for just a single job.

[source,groovy]
.Job Detail Script
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJob.groovy[]
----

[source,options="nowrap"]
.Job Detail Script - Text Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJobResponse.txt[]
----


[source]
.Job Detail Script - JSON Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJobResponse.json[]
----

Commit message:

documenting the new worker.queue-type configuration property

docs/guide/src/docs/asciidoc/usage.adoc, after:


[[_usage]]
= Usage

== Scheduling

The basic usage of this library is to provide easy way to run scheduled tasks in a distributed environment.

=== Cron Jobs

To create a scheduled CRON job use `@Cron` annotation containing the CRON definition string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Cron Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/CronSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Fixed Delay Jobs

To create a fixed delay job use `@FixedDelay` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Fixed Delay Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedDelaySpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Fixed Rate Jobs

To create a fixed delay job use `@FixedRate` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.

[source,java]
.Fixed Rate Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Initial Delay Jobs

To create a job with an initial delay use `@InitialDelay` annotation containing the duration string on a bean method.
This annotation can be combined with `@FixedRate` and `@FixedDelay` annotations.

[source,java]
.Initial Delay Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/InitialDelaySpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

== Concurrency Management

You can limit the number of parallel executions using the `@Concurrency` annotation. `@Consecutive` annotation
is an alias to `@Concurrency(1)` and disables parallel execution completely.

[source,java]
.Fixed Rate Job Running at Most Five Parallel Tasks
----
@Concurrency(5)
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

== Distributed Jobs

=== Leaders and Followers Jobs

Micronaut Worker library can help you to run jobs in a distributed environments. You can choose to
run the code only on the leader server or only on the followers.

[source,java]
.Leader Only Job
----
@LeaderOnly
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/CronSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

[source,java]
.Follower Only Job
----
@FollowerOnly
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/FixedRateSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

=== Jobs using Queue

In the distributed environment, the tasks usually process messages using queues. In Micronaut Worker,
you have three type of queue related jobs - producers, consumers and pipes - depending on a number of
arguments they have and their return value.

The name of the queue can be customised using `@Consumes` and `@Produces`
annotations, otherwise the name is derived from the simple name of the class with any `Job`, `Consumer`, `Producer`
suffixes (in this order recursively). If the `micronaut.application.name` property is set then the
extracted name is prefixed with the application name followed by an underscore. For example,
`MyOwnConsumerJob` with `micronaut.application.name` set to `myapp` will produce the following
default queue name `myapp_MyOwn`.

==== Producer

Producer jobs returns a value, usually a `Publisher`, collection of objects or any other object.
Producer jobs are always run only on the leader server.

[source,java]
.Producer Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker-tck/src/main/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/tck/queue/SendWordsJob.groovy[tag=simple-producer-method,indent=0]
----

==== Consumer

Consumer jobs takes a single parameter. They are usually a `@FixedRate` jobs waiting for a message from a queue.
The messages can be sent into the queue from external systems, a producer job or using `JobManager#enqueue` method.

[source,java]
.Consumer Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker-tck/src/main/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/tck/queue/SendWordsJob.groovy[tag=simple-consumer-method,indent=0]
----


==== Pipe

Pipe jobs are combination of producer and consumer. They usually use `@Consumes` and `@Produces`
to specify the source, and the destination name of the queue.

[source,java]
.Pipe Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/PipeSpec.groovy[tag=job-method,indent=0]
----

As with consumer job, you can use `JobManager#enqueue` to send messages to the job.

[source,java]
.Send Message to Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/groovy/com/agorapulse/worker/annotation/PipeSpec.groovy[tag=enqueue,indent=0]
----

== Configuration

=== General Settings

You can disable all jobs by setting `worker.enabled` property to `false`:

[source,yaml]
.Disabling All Jobs
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-disabled.yml[]
----


NOTE: All the jobs are also disabed for the `test` and `function` environment.

You can set the default queue type using the `worker.queue-type` configuration property. This can be very handy for local development to ensure your application is running against the local implementation.

[source,yaml]
.Setting the Default Queue Type
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-local.yml[]
----

=== Job Configuration

Literally everything you can configure using the annotations, you can configure externally.
The name of the job for classes having just a single job method is the name of the class hyphenated, e.g. `sample-job`
for a class `SampleJob`. If the class contains more than one job methods then jobs are created
for each method and the name contains both the simple class name and the name of the method, e.g.
`sample-job-method-one` for `SampleJob#methodOne`. You can override the default name by using
`@Named("another-name")`. The custom name should already been hyphenated.

You can individually disable specific jobs:

[source,yaml]
.Disabling Single Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-disabled-individual.yml[]
----

You can even change the type of the job:

[source,yaml]
.Switch to Cron Job
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-cron.yml[]
----

WARNING: You can use only one of `cron`, `fixed-delay` and `fixed-rate` settings. If more than one
is used then the first of `cron`, `fixed-delay` or `fixed-rate` is selected in this particular order. You can use`initial-delay` either individually or with `fixed-delay` or `fixed-rate` settings.

You can change the concurrency level and leader/follower execution:

[source,yaml]
.Concurrency Selection
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-concurrency.yml[]
----

You can configure the consumer and producer queues for distributed jobs.

[source,yaml]
.Queues Customisation
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/application-queues.yml[]
----

== Events

There are currently three events being fired:

  * `JobExecutionStartedEvent` - this event is fired before executing the job
  * `JobExecutionFinishedEvent` - this event is fired after the execution is finished
  * `JobExecutionResultEvent` - this event is fired after the execution of producer or pipe job is finished

WARNING: The `JobExecutionResultEvent` contains the reference to the `result` of the execution and any modifications of the `result` may cause unexpected behavior.

The basic example (already present in the codebase) is simple logging:

[source,java]
.Logging Job Excution using Events
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/main/java/com/agorapulse/worker/event/JobEventsLogger.java[lines=18..-1,options="nowrap"]
----

TIP: If https://github.com/agorapulse/micronaut-snitch[Micronaut Snitch] is present on the classpath and configured with the name of the job then the `snitch` method is called automatically after successful execution.

== Console Integration

Micronaut Worker does not provide any management endpoint for security reasons, but it integrates with
https://agorapulse.github.io/micronaut-console[Micronaut Console] to monitor the jobs and event to trigger them manually.

There is an instance of `JobManager` aliased as `jobs` added into the script bindings. There is a variable added for
every job as well. The name is a lower-camel-case version on the job name such as `sampleJob` for the `sample-job` job.

[source]
.Additional Binding into Micoronaut Console
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/variables.txt[]
----

TIP: The job variables are instances of `JobAccessor` which also provides methods `run()` and `enqueue(message)` to let you easily trigger the jobs from the console.

A very simple script with just variable `jobs` will actually print the status of the current job execution. Depending
on which console's endpoint you choose, you get either text or a JSON summary.

[source,groovy]
.Job Manager Script
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobs.groovy[]
----

[source,options="nowrap"]
.Job Manager Script - Text Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobsResponse.txt[]
----


[source]
.Job Manager Script - JSON Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/listJobsResponse.json[]
----

Returning a job variable from the script will render details for just a single job.

[source,groovy]
.Job Detail Script
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJob.groovy[]
----

[source,options="nowrap"]
.Job Detail Script - Text Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJobResponse.txt[]
----


[source]
.Job Detail Script - JSON Result
----
include::{root-dir}/libs/micronaut-worker/src/test/resources/com/agorapulse/worker/console/ConsoleSpec/oneJobResponse.json[]
----
